Since we’ve previously covered open source
tools for data science, let’s look at the commercial options you’ll find in many enterprise
projects. Take another look at the overview of different
tool categories. Since cloud products are a newer species,
they follow the trend of having multiple tasks integrated in tools. This especially holds true for the tasks marked
green in the diagram. Let’s start with the fully integrated visual
tools category. Since these tools introduce a component where
large scale execution of data science workflows happens in compute clusters, we’ve changed
the title here and added the word “Platform.” These clusters are composed of multiple server
machines, transparently for the user, in the background. Watson Studio, together with Watson OpenScale,
covers the complete development life cycle for all data science, machine learning, and
AI tasks. Another example is Microsoft Azure Machine
Learning. This is also a fully cloud-hosted offering
supporting the complete development life cycle of all data science, machine learning, and
AI tasks. And finally, another example is H2O Driverless
AI, which we’ve already introduced in the last video. Although it is a product that you download
and install, one-click deployment is available for the common cloud service providers. Since operations and maintenance are not done
by the cloud provider, as is the case with Watson Studio, Open Scale, and Azure Machine
Learning, this delivery model should not be confused with Platform or Software as a Service
-- PaaS or SaaS. In data management, with some exceptions,
there are SaaS versions of existing open source and commercial tools. Remember, SaaS stands for “software as a
service.” It means that the cloud provider operates
the tool for you in the cloud. As an example, the cloud provider operates
the product by backing up your data and configuration and installing updates. As mentioned, there is proprietary tooling,
which is only available as a cloud product. Sometimes it’s only available from a single
cloud provider. One example of such a service is Amazon Web
Services DynamoDB, a NoSQL database that allows storage and retrieval of data in a key-value
or a document store format. The most prominent document data structure
is JSON (pronounced “jay-sun”). Another flavour of such a service is Cloudant,
which is a database-as-a-service offering. But, under the hood it is based on the open
source Apache CouchDB. It has an advantage: although complex operational
tasks like updating, backup, restore, and scaling are done by the cloud provider, under
the hood this offering is compatible with CouchDB. Therefore, the application can be migrated
to another CouchDB server without changing the application. And IBM offers Db2 as a service as well. This is an example of a commercial database
made available as a software-as-a-service offering in the cloud, taking operational
tasks away from the user. When it comes to commercial data integration
tools, we talk not only about “extract, transform, and load,” or “ETL” tools,
but also about “extract, load, and transform,” or “ELT,” tools. This means the transformation steps are not
done by a data integration team but are pushed towards the domain of the data scientist or
data engineer. Two widely used commercial data integration
tools are Informatica Cloud Data Integration and IBM’s Data Refinery. Data Refinery enables transformation of large
amounts of raw data into consumable, quality information in a spreadsheet-like user interface. Data Refinery is part of IBM Watson Studio. The market for cloud data visualization tools
is huge, and every major cloud vendor has one. An example of a smaller company’s cloud-based
data visualization tool is DataMeer. IBM offers it’s famous Cognos Business intelligence
suite as cloud solution as well. IBM Data Refinery also offers data exploration
and visualization functionality in Watson Studio. Again, these are just some examples of a rapidly
changing and growing commercial ecosystem among a huge number of established and emerging
vendors. In Watson Studio, an abundance of different
visualizations can be used to better understand data. For example, this 3D bar chart enables you
to visualize a target value on the vertical dimension, which is dependent on two other
values on the horizontal dimensions. Coloring enables you to visualize a third
dimension. Hierarchical edge bundling enables you to
visualize correlations and affiliations between entities. If sufficient, a classic bar chart can do
the job as well, whereas a 2D scatter plot with a heat map shows two dependent data fields,
one on the y axis and one as color intensity. A tree map shows distribution of subsets within
a set, the famous pie chart does the same but in a non-hierarchical manner, and finally,
a word cloud pops out significant terms in a document corpus. Model building can be done using a service
such as Watson Machine Learning. Watson Machine Learning can train and build
models using various open source libraries. Google has a similar service on their cloud
called AI Platform Training. Nearly every cloud provider has a solution
for this task. Model deployment in commercial software is
usually tightly integrated to the model building process. Here is an example of the SPSS Collaboration
and Deployment Services, which can be used to deploy any type of asset created by the
SPSS software tools suite. The same holds for other vendors. In addition, commercial software can export
models in an open format. As an example, SPSS Modeler supports exporting
models as Predictive Model Markup Language, or “PMML,” which can be read by numerous
other commercial and open software packages. Watson Machine Learning can also be used to
deploy a model and make it available to consumers using a REST interface. Amazon SageMaker Model Monitor is an example
of a cloud tool that continuously monitors deployed machine learning and deep learning
models. Again, every major cloud provider has similar
tooling. This is also the case for Watson OpenScale. OpenScale and Watson Studio… …unify the landscape. Everything marked in green can be done using
Watson Studio and Watson OpenScale. We’ll cover Open Scale will be covered in
a later video. You’ve learned how the most common tasks
in data science are supported by commercial cloud tools. Integration provides us the ability to use
the same tools for multiple tasks. In the next videos, we’ll look at packages,
APIs, datasets, and models for data science.